At first glance, determining the size of a computer program
seems trivial.  Since computer programs are stored in files,
you can sum the size of the files to determine the size of
the program in terms of the storage required to save it.
With marginally more effort, you can obtain a more
sophisticated measure of size by counting the newlines
present in the files, which provides you with the canonical
"lines of code" size measurement.  Indeed, these two
approaches are widely used in the software community to
measure the size of computer programs.

This thesis provides a second glance, or perhaps even a
stare, at the problem of determining the size of computer
programs.  It is motivated by the failure of current
approaches to program size measurement to support basic
software engineering techniques, such as estimation, or
incremental development.  This thesis reports on the
development and evaluation of a tool, called LOCC, that
provides new infrastructure for size measurement, and on the
preliminary evaluation of this tool on XXX software systems.
In general, the evaluation indicates that LOCC provides
novel support for size measurement that can substantially
improve the ability of developers to carry out high quality
software engineering.


