%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% -*- Mode: Latex -*- %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%% project-techreport.tex -- 
%% Author          : Philip Johnson
%% Created On      : Tue Mar 31 11:44:58 2009
%% Last Modified By: Philip Johnson
%% Last Modified On: Mon Nov 30 16:37:26 2009
%% RCS: $Id$
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%%   Copyright (C) 2009 
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%% 

\section{Introduction}

Development of the ``smart grid'', a modernized power infrastructure, is
one of the key technological challenges facing the United States at the
dawn of the 21st century. According to the Department of Energy, the smart
grid should: (1) Enable active participation by consumers by providing
choices and incentives to modify electricity purchasing patterns and
behavior; (2) Accommodate all generation and storage options, including
wind and solar power.  (3) Enable new products, services, and markets
through a flexible market providing cost-benefit tradeoffs to consumers and
market participants; (4) Provide reliable power that is relatively
interruption-free; (5) Optimize asset utilization and maximize operational
efficiency; (6) Provide the ability to self-heal by anticipating and
responding to system disturbances; (7) Resist attacks on physical
infrastructure by natural disasters and attacks on cyber-structure by
malware and hackers \cite{NETL:GridCharacteristics}.

In October, 2009, the government awarded approximately \$3.4 billion in
federal stimulus money to approximately 100 organizations in 49 states to
support smart grid development.  While substantial, this investment is
almost totally focused on low-level infrastructure: meters, communication
networks, phasor measurement units.  By analogy to the Internet, it is
similar to upgrading a copper wire network to fiber optic cable, along with
installation of high performance routers and name servers.  Such
infrastructure is a necessary requirement for high-level Internet services
such as the World Wide Web, but does relatively little to determine the
nature of those services.

The smart grid will produce and consume information about electricity as
well as electricity itself, thus forming a specialized kind of Internet. At
the current time, it is not clear what ecosystem of higher-level services
should be developed to best communicate, analyze and interpret this
low-level electrical data to consumers.  (By ``consumers'', we mean all of
the various customers of utilities: both individuals and businesses
alike. )

One reason why there is little clarity about consumer-facing information
services in the Smart Grid is the nature of the current grid, which (from a
consumer point of view) is a classic ``black box'' technology.  For almost
100 years, utility customers have plugged appliances into the grid via
electrical outlets and expected them to ``just work''.  Put another way,
the U.S. power industry has operated for a century under the assumption
that consumers should have reliable access to a virtually unlimited amount
of high quality power.  Traditionally, consumers have been given extremely
little information about power beyond a monthly bill because neither
consumers nor utilities believed further information was necessary or
appropriate.

Electricity as black box requires electricity to be cheap, reliable, and
unlimited, but those days appear to be drawing to a close for a number of
reasons.  First, the heavy reliance on fossil fuels for power generation is
not sustainable: most economists agree that ``peak oil'' has either already
occurred or will occur in the next two decades. At that point, oil supply
will decrease and prices will increase.  Second, fossil fuels generate
green house gases that contribute to climate change, and so there is an
urgent need to move to renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, wave,
and geothermal.  Third, reliance on fossil fuels creates a variety of
political problems.

Integration of renewable energy sources, unfortunately, creates significant
new problems related to storage and grid stability.  Unlike fossil-fuel
based power generation (called ``firm'' since utility companies can
generate new power from fossil fuels at will), most renewable energy
sources generate energy depending upon generally unpredictable
environmental factors.  As a result, simply adding a solar panel to every
rooftop and tying them into the grid would actually do more harm than good
at present.  This is because grid stability depends upon energy supply
equaling demand on a second to second basis, and utilities generally do not
have a way to monitor and balance a grid that incorporates high levels of
widespread, distributed generation. Thus, renewable energy sources are not
a magic bullet that can replace fossil fuels while enabling the US
electrical infrastructure to remain a black box to consumers.

A potential approach to retaining the black box nature of the grid to
consumers is ``demand-response'' technology.  With demand response,
utilities obtain control over major appliances in the home such as the hot
water heater and the heating/cooling system. At peak times, utilities can
shut off the water heater or change thermostat settings in order to reduce
the load on the grid.  While demand response can be effective and is
already deployed in some commercial settings, it is not clear that
consumers will universally accept utility-based control of their home
systems.  For example, a recent study of the Boulder residents found that
approximately 50\% of those surveyed would not want demand-response
installed in their house \cite{Farhar09}.

Even if electricity could remain a black box to consumers, there is
compelling evidence suggesting that it should not.  According to the July
2009 report ``Unlocking energy efficiency in the U.S. Economy''
\cite{Granade09}, there is the potential to reduce annual
non-transportation energy consumption by roughly 23 percent by 2020,
eliminating more than \$1.2 trillion in waste.  Such a reduction in energy
use would result in abatement of 1.1 gigatons of greenhouse gas emissions
annually. ``Unlocking'' this untapped potential requires, in part, improved
access by consumers to energy information, along with changes in behavior
based on this information that produce the desired efficiencies.

The view that electricity cannot and should not remain a black box to
consumers motivates the central question of this research: just what kind of
``white box'' should it become?  More specifically, {\em What kinds of
  information, provided in what ways and at what times, enables consumers
  to make positive, sustained changes to their energy consumption
  behaviors?}

In this research, we propose to develop technologies and experimental
methods that support more efficient and effective scientific study of the ways
in which access to information about energy usage impacts on consumer
behavior.  Our work will build upon current energy user interface successes
and failures; leverage emerging smart grid standards; incorporate open
source and component-oriented development techniques; and respect findings
from behavioral research. We will design and carry out two case studies
based upon our technologies: the first involving a university campus dorm
competition and the second involving a community-based energy challenge. We
choose these two domains because they are of growing popularity and
providing standardized technology and methodological support can foster
replication, meta-analysis of data, and quicker convergence to
scientifically-based understanding of energy information needs and
behaviors in the Smart Grid.  

The anticipated contributions of this research will include: (1) outcome
data from our two case studies that provide new insight into requirements
for Smart Grid information services; (2) replicable methods for inquiry
into Smart Grid technologies and their impact on consumers; (3) open
source technologies to facilitate scientific experimentation on the Smart
Grid; and (4) a unique approach to organizing energy information and
interaction as nested ``energy community circles'', which attempts to solve
problems with context and provide greater opportunities for engagement and
behavioral change.

The remainder of this proposal is organized as follows.  Section
\ref{sec:related-work} overviews research and technologies that serve as a
basis for our approach.  Section \ref{sec:methodology} presents our proposed
experimental approach.  Section \ref{sec:merit} discusses the intellectual
merit and broader impact of this research. 

\section{Related work}
\label{sec:related-work}

Our proposed research combines insights from behavioral research on energy
efficiency along with prior approaches to energy data collection and analysis.

\subsection{Energy efficiency and behavior}

\subsubsection{PTEM: the Physical, Technical and Economic Model}

Before reviewing approaches to understanding energy usage behavior, it is
important to understand the most prominent model for affecting energy usage over the
past several decades, often referred to as the Physical, Technical, and
Economic Model (PTEM) \cite{Lutzenhiser93}.  PTEM is of interest because it
both represents the approach taken by most utilities to encourage energy
efficiency, and is explicitly non-behavioral in nature.

Programs designed under the PTEM model are designed to improve energy
efficiency by causing businesses and consumers to adopt energy efficient
devices and products (e.g., lights, motors, HVAC (heating, ventilation, and
air conditioning) systems, windows, building shells, etc.).  Adoption can
occur when a consumer buys something new (like a new house or light bulb)
or when they replace an existing product.  The targeted energy efficiency
improvements come from changing the efficiency of the technology consumers
are using, not from changing their use of that technology.  PTEM takes an
engineering-centric approach to energy efficiency, assuming that energy use
can only be affected by new technology, which in turn can only be affected
by marginal price subsidies. As the approach adopted by most utilities, it
is the reason why the vast majority of residential energy efficiency
programs rely on product rebates to incentivize purchases of energy
efficient products and services. PTEM is an attractive model to program
developers because it doesn't require consumers to change the way they use
energy (e.g., the thermostat temperature that they select), and it doesn't
require any effort to ensure that any change in behavior persists.

Unfortunately, there are fundamental problems with the PTEM model. First,
it assumes that consumers are economically rational with respect to their
energy behavior, and will buy and install energy saving devices if they are
cost-effective. As shown by Granade \cite{Granade09}, this assumption does
not hold in a wide variety of situations.  Second, it takes into account
only the purchasing behavior and neglects the operating behavior.  This is
a problem since up to half of actual energy use is dependent upon operating
behavior, rather than the specific technologies being employed
\cite{Frank09}.

\subsubsection{Alternatives to PTEM: incorporating behavior}

If humans do not always conform to the most economically rational behavior,
then what else do they respond to?  Faiers provides an overview of the
range of behavioral theories that might apply, and provides categories
including consumer choice (Behavior Economic Theory, Hierarchy of Needs);
needs, values, and attributes (Personality Theory, Control Theory, etc.);
Learning (Cognitive Consistency, Balance Theory); Social Learning (Social
exchange theory, etc.); Buying Process (Rational Choice, Innovation
Decision Theory, etc.); categorisation of consumers (Diffusion Theory,
etc.) and Product Attributes (Attribute Theory) \cite{Faiers07}. When it
comes to application, attempts to influence behavior generally tend to
involve: personalized information, general and specific commitments, goal
setting, social pressure, and constant and contextual feedback.

The first research on behavioral approaches to modifying energy consumption
occurred during the first energy crisis of the late 1970s. Becker found
significant effects from combining energy saving goals and feedback
\cite{Becker78} .  Households committed to goals of either 2 percent or 20
percent energy savings, and then a subset of each group were given feedback
on how well they were doing. The group that received the higher goal and
feedback reduced their actual usage by an average of 15 percent, while the
groups that received either the higher goal or the feedback reduced energy
use by about 5 percent.  Similarly, Houwelingen found that feedback and
goal setting produced a reduction of 12\% in energy use, and that usage
returned to prior levels if the feedback device was removed
\cite{Houwelingen89}.

A study combined information, feedback, and goal-setting to produce very
significant savings: 23 percent natural gas reductions, 15 percent
electricity reductions and 18 percent less water \cite{Vollink99}.  A
program involving ``Eco-Teams'' of 6-10 people who met once a month to
discuss energy conservation and related topics achieved sustained energy
reductions of 7.5\% over three years by combining information, social
pressure and feedback \cite{Staats04}.

\subsection{Energy data interfaces}

Unfortunately, many of the meters currently designed for the smart grid
(such as those designed by Enel and Telvent) do not even provide a
consumer-facing interface; instead, they simply report on electrical usage
directly to the utility.  This simplifies billing operations for the
utility, but provides no direct feedback to the consumer.

Whether using a smart grid meter with a consumer-facing interface, or a
home energy monitoring system, the most common form of interface to energy
data provides a simple line chart or histogram of energy usage over various
time intervals: minutes, hours, days, or weeks.  Examples include home
energy monitoring systems such as the TED 5000; Google's PowerMeter
application, and building information management systems such as those by
Obvius, Lucid Design Group, Small Energy Group, and AgileWaves. In some
cases, these systems can display energy usage in alternative units, such as
carbon emitted or cost.  Figure \ref{fig:LucidDesignGroup} shows a representative interface from
Lucid Design Group.

\begin{figure*}[th]
  \center
  \includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth]{luciddesigngroup.3.eps}
  \caption{\small The Building Dashboard application from LucidDesignGroup}
  \label{fig:LucidDesignGroup}
\end{figure*} 


At the utility-level, there are attempts to show grid-level information
through sites such as Ecotricity \cite{Ecotricity} or CurrentEnergy
\cite{CurrentEnergy}.  While most adhere to the standard line chart style
of visualization, the Ecotricity site also provides an interpretation of
the data with a stoplight that shows red, yellow, or green depending upon
the amount of carbon being produced by the grid at the current time.  The
goal of the stop light is to provide consumers with the information
necessary to enable them to shift energy-intensive tasks (such as running
their dryer) away from times when carbon intensity is high.

An emerging approach to energy interfaces is ``Eco-Visualization'',
defined by Pierce as ``Any kind of interactive device targetted at
revealing energy use in order to promote more sustainabie behaviors or
foster postive attitudes towards sustainable practices \cite{Pierce08}.''
The seminal eco-visualization is called ``7000 oaks and counting'' by
Tiffany Holmes \cite{Holmes07}.  In the visualization, rings of spinning
oak trees represent carbon loads for a given environment from a single
building to a city.  If the loads are low, the rings are composed of green
trees. As loads increase, trees are removed and replaced by appliances such
as light bulbs or refridgerators.  Another eco-visualization involves a
virtual polar bear floating on an ice floe. The ice floe grows when users
commit to environmental actions and decreases when users choose not to
commit to change \cite{Dillahunt08}.

There is also movement toward interfaces apart from traditional
websites.  For example, Lucid Design Group and Oberlin College are
planning to experiment with the use of ambient orbs to indicate energy
consumption \cite{Peterson09}.  The StepGreen system attempts to 
leverage social networking sites like FaceBook and MySpace to enable sustainable
behavior \cite{Mankoff07}. 

Not all interfaces focus exclusively on energy data.  For example, the
Energy Pledge prototype was designed for public display of personal
commitments \cite{Pierce09}.  The StepGreen system also provides a display
of commitments.  

While these various interface directions are promising and many have
yielded positive initial results, they do not address some issues and leave
other questions unanswered. First, it is often not clear whether or not and
how a given technology could be re-used in a new context.  Many of the
systems are either stand-alone (such as Stepgreen) or appear highly
customized to a specific context (Oberlin's Campus Resource
System). Second, there tends to be a single focus to the interface: either
very specific (one's dorm), or very general (the overall grid).  

\subsection{Energy data design issues}

The growing popularity of energy data related information systems is
heartening, but also demonstrates that much more can be done. 

First, the current state of energy information technology is reminiscent of
web site technology prior to the development of content management systems
such as Plone or Drupal, where lack of infrastructure meant that web site
developers were repeatedly re-implementing the same basic functionality for
navigation, page templates, file uploads, and so forth, or paying a
commercial provider to do it for them.  There are no open source energy
information technologies equivalent to Plone that enables, for example, a
university to quickly create a new dorm energy challenge system.  No
current system has an architecture that facilitates ``mashups'' or
``plugins'', such that a developer could quickly build an interface to a
new technology such as Google Wave, or integrate a new approach to
commitments.

Second, energy information technologies are not designed to be amenable to
scientific research.  To gauge the effectiveness of an information capability, it is
helpful to gain a detailed understanding of how it is accessed, by whom,
and under what circumstances.  Such instrumentation support appears to be
largely lacking from current approaches. 

In addition to instrumentation, it is often scientifically useful to
support treatments: in other words, providing different forms of
information to different populations of users in order to gain insight into
the effect of a treatment upon an outcome of interest. For example, one way
to assess the effect of commitments on energy conservation would be to
provide a ``Pledge Wall'' to only half the floors in a dorm, then use a
combination of qualitative (post-study interviews) and quantitative (actual
changes in energy) to assess the impact of that behavioral treatment.

Finally, no current information system spans energy from the ``micro''
(i.e. single building) to the ``macro'' (i.e. utility-level grid).  For
example, current in-home energy meters provide no insight into the carbon
intensity of the grid currently supplying the power to the home appliances.
Grid-level information systems like Ecotricity or CurrentEnergy do not
allow drill down to individual cities or homes.

\section{Gaining insight into Smart Grid information needs}
\label{sec:methodology}

To provide better insight into the requirements of the Smart Grid for
support of sustained, positive behavioral change, this research will
consist of a combination of  technology development and case studies.

\subsection{Technology Development}

\subsubsection{WattBlocks}

As we note above, current energy information systems tend to be closed,
either due to proprietary licensing or due to an architecture that limits
extensibility and reuse.  During the past ten years, we have developed
expertise in the design, implementation, and evaluation of open source,
extensible architectures through the Hackystat Project \cite{csdl2-09-02,csdl2-09-07,csdl2-09-01,csdl2-06-06}.  

Hackystat is an open source, scalable, extensible framework for collection,
analysis, interpretation, and dissemination of software engineering process
and product data.  It currently consists of over 500,000 lines of code,
written in a variety of languages, spread over 25 interdependent software
systems.  Hackystat implements a service-oriented architecture, where
software engineering data is first gathered by ``sensors'' and sent to a
low-level repository for storage.  The data is abstracted by one or more
middleware analysis components, and finally presented to the user through
one or more user interface components.  Hackystat components typically
implement a RESTful API, and user interface components have
included email, ambient devices (Orb, Nabaztag), web applications (Wicket),
social networks (Facebook), and micro-blogging platforms (Twitter).
Hackystat has had thousands of users in academic, government, and
industrial organizations.

In this research, we will develop an open source, scalable, extensible,
component-oriented framework for energy data collection, analysis,
interpretation, and dissemination that builds upon our experience using the
Hackystat Framework.  Similar to Hackystat, our new framework, called the
Watt Building Blocks Framework (or WattBlocks for short), is a RESTful,
service-oriented architecture where individual components implement either
sensors, middleware, or user interfaces.  Sensors are data collection
devices that will support acquisition from a variety of sources: energy
generation data (collected from utility-level power plants, or local
facilities such as solar panels); energy consumption (from in-home energy
meters, building information systems, or utility meters or submeters); and
energy storage (from in-home or building battery, capacitor, or
utility-level storage systems such as pumped water).  Middleware components
provide storage, abstraction, and analysis of energy data. User interface
components will interface to the middleware components and simplify
integration with both traditional user interfaces (i.e. webapps, email) as
well as new interfaces (i.e. Google Wave).

Figure \ref{fig:WattBlocks} illustrates one possible WattBlocks system
configuration.  In this configuration, there are three WattBlock sensors
represented as yellow blocks.  The first gathers consumption data from an
Obvius energy meter attached to a University building, the second gathers
consumption data from a home energy meter called the TED 5000, and the
third gathers grid-level generation data from an online interface to the
local utility.  Sensors are generally implementing by polling their sources
at regular intervals (i.e. once a minute). Sensors must have internet
access in order to send the gathered data to the WattDepot repository.


\begin{figure*}[th]
  \center
  \includegraphics[width=0.8\textwidth]{architecture.4.eps}
  \caption{\small Example WattBlocks system configuration. Sensor WattBlocks are
    yellow, Middleware WattBlocks are blue, and UI WattBlocks are purple.
    Green arrows represent the flow of information about energy; blue
    arrows represent the flow of information about user behavior.}
  \label{fig:WattBlocks}
\end{figure*} 

The configuration also includes three WattBlock middleware components.  The
WattDepot repository is an Internet service for storing and analyzing
energy data.  It receives data from sensors, and can be queried by other
services for energy information.  BehaviorDepot is a service that
essentially maintains a log of user behaviors (commitments, page views,
forum participation, etc.).  It is the responsibility of higher level
services to send information about user behavior to the BehaviorDepot
service, which stores behavioral data in a way that allows both immediate
and future analysis in order to determine the effectiveness of various
experimental treatments.  Finally, this configuration illustrates an
``OrbDriver'' middleware component, which shows how a new interface
modality (i.e. an ambient device) can be easily integrated into the system.
For example, the OrbDriver could poll the WattDepot service on a regular
basis for the carbon intensity of the grid, then instruct the Orb to turn
red, yellow, or green depending upon the results. Alternatively, if the Orb
was displayed in a public area of the dormitory, the OrbDriver could be
configured to query the BehaviorDepot service for the status of the dorm
competition, then display red, yellow, or green depending upon whether the
dorm was currently ahead, even, or behind the other dorms with respect to
energy usage.

The final component in the example configuration is the eSpheres user
interface component.  This component implements a special form of social
network to be detailed below. It obtains energy data from the WattDepot service,
interacts with users, and logs the results of these interactions to the
BehaviorDepot service.

It is important to understand that WattBlocks is intended to be installed,
configured, and hosted separately for experimental site.  We will not, for
example, implement a single, ``global'' WattDepot service to which all data
must be sent.  This creates a small amount of additional overhead for
individual organizations, but makes the overall system more scalable and
avoids many (but not all) privacy issues.


Our development of WattBlocks is in its early stages, but our initial
experiences are quite positive.  Since early 2009, we have been working on
the WattDepot service, which has been used successfully for application
development since Fall of 2009 \cite{WattDepot}.  To exercise the system
and its interfaces, we have developed several prototype user interface
services on top of WattDepot, including a command line interface called
WattDepotCLI, and a set of prototypes providing Ecotricity and
CurrentEnergy style data.  Figure \ref{fig:WattDepotUI} illustrates one of
these interfaces.

\begin{figure*}[th]
  \center
  \includegraphics[width=0.5\textwidth]{greenometer.2.eps}
  \caption{\small Example WattDepot user interface.}
 \label{fig:WattDepotUI}
\end{figure*} 


\subsubsection{eSpheres}






\subsection{Case studies}

\subsubsection{Dormitory Energy Competition}

\subsubsection{Household Energy Challenge}

\subsection{Project Plan}


\section{Conclusions}
\label{sec:merit}

\subsection{Intellectual merit}

\subsection{Broader impacts}









%%% Must check to see which refs are present and add remaining.

