ECSCW ¹95 Instructions for Authors

Please note instructions on how to get style sheet at the end of
this message!

Manuscripts

Papers on original work on CSCW topics should be sent as
camera-ready manuscripts in paper and/or electronic form to
    ECSCW'95 Secretariat, IPLab, NADA, KTH, 
    S-100 44 Stockholm, Sweden
and/or by FTP to
    ftp://ftp.nada.kth.se/pub/ecscw95/submit-papers/
    in one of the following formats (in order of preference)
    +++++ Postscript
    ++++ RTF
    +++ LaTEX
    ++ MSWord for Macintosh (preferably in binhex)
    + FrameMaker for Macintosh (binhex) or Sun
to arrive not later than February 1, 1995.

The paper must contain an abstract of not more than 100 words and must
not exceed 16 pages.

Notification of acceptance/rejection will be sent out March 24
(include email address or fax number for fast notification).  

Final camera ready copy (on paper) has to arrive by April 21 and will
be printed without further editing or processing. It should therefore
be laser-printed (or similar) on white paper of good quality.  Use
envelopes that provide appropriate protection to the manuscript.  The
manuscript should be accompanied by a signed covering letter in which
the author(s) state that they submit the paper for publication in the
proceedings of ECSCW ¹95.

Document layout

The manuscript must not have page number or running headers and
footers. The sheets should be numbered on the reverse side with a
pencil.  All manuscripts should be printed on one side only of A4
paper (210 x 297 mm). The text bloc should have a one-column format
and should be be positioned at the center of the page with 35 mm
margins on all sides. That is, lines should measure 140 mm.

Title, author, abstract

The title of the article should be preceded by 50 mm space. The title
should be set in 24 point Times Roman, flushed left.  The title should
be followed by the name of the auhor(s) in 14 point Times Roman,
flushed left. Immediately after the name of the author, the name and
country of the affiliation of the author should be given in a separate
line (12 point Times Roman, flushed left).

The full postal address of each author should be supplied on a
separate sheet for inclusion in an address list at the end of the
proceedings. The postal address should include: full name, name of
organization and department, address, city, zipcode, country,
international phone number, international fax number, and email
address.

The title, author¹s name, and author¹s affiliation should be followed
by a short abstract of not more than 200 words, which clearly
summarizes the paper. The abstract should be set in 10 point Helvetica
(or an equivalent sans serif font) with 13 point line leading (line
space). The abstract should have 24 point space before and after.

Body text

Body text should be set in 12 point Times Roman (the font used here)
or an equivalent serif font. Line spacing (leading) should be 15
point. The first paragraph after a headline should not be indented;
otherwise the first line of a body text paragraph should be indented
by 5 mm. Body text should be justified (i.e., do not use a
ragged-right style).

Headings should be set in Times Roman and flush left:
	Level 1: 18 point, 24 point space before, 12 point after.
	Level 2: 14 point, 18 point space before, 9 point after.
	Level 3: 12 point, 12 point space before, 6 point after.

Quoted passages of more than 40 words should be set off from the text
by indenting the left-hand margin 5 mm. Such quotations should be set
in 10 point Times Roman with 13 point line spacing, with 2 mm
additional spacing before and after the quotation.

Trademarks and system names should be set in small caps, for example,
The Coordinator.

References

Citations should be incorporated into the text, either directly in the
sentence (³As claimed by Bowers (1990)...²) or at the end, with
author¹s name and date of publication in parenthesis: (Bowers, 1990).
References should be listed at the end of the article, after the
Notes, in alphabetical and chronological order. References should be
set in 10 point Times Roman, with 5 mm hanging indents.  (a)
References to books should include the author¹s name; year of
publication; title in full, in italics; publisher; place of
publication; volume number (if appropriate).

Johansen, R. (1988): Groupware. Computer Support for Business Teams,
The Free Press, New York and London.

(b) References to articles in periodicals should include the author¹s
name; year of publication; title of article, in quotation marks; full
title of periodical, in italics; volume number; issue number; issue
date; page numbers.

Gerson, E. M. and Star, S. L. (1986): ³Analyzing due process in the
workplace², ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems, vol. 4,
no. 3, July 1986, pp. 257-270.

(c) References to essays in edited editions should include the
author¹s name; year of publication; title of essay, in quotation
marks; editor¹s name; title of collection, in italics; publisher;
place of publication; volume number (if appropriate).

Bowers, J. M. (1991): ³The Janus Faces of Design: Some Critical
Questions for CSCW², in J. M. Bowers and S. D. Benford (eds.): Studies
in Computer Supported Cooperative Work. Theory, Practice and Design,
North-Holland, Amsterdam etc., 1991, pp. 333-350.

Notes

Please keep notes to a minimum, and avoid long or discursive notes.
Short notes should preferably be placed as footnotes at the bottom of
the page. Notes should be numbered consecutively with arabic numbers,
and indicated in the text by superscript numbers.

Tables

Tables should be numbered consecutively with roman numbers, followed
by the title (Table I. xxxxx). Horizontal rules should be indicated;
vertical rules should not be used. Each table should be mentioned in
the text. Each table should be positioned in place in the manuscript.

Figures

Figures should be numbered consecutively with arabic numbers, followed
by the title (Figure 1. xxxxx). Each figure should be mentioned in the
text. Each figure should be positioned in place in the manuscript.

Photographs should be black-and-white and should be prepared for
offset printing without further processing.

Permissions

It is the permission of the author to obtain written permission for
quotations from unpublished material, or for all quotations in excess
of 250 words in one extract or 500 words in total from any work still
in copyright, and for the reprinting of illustrations or tables from
unpublished or copyrighted material.

Microsoft Word and TeX Style Sheets

The required formatting is available as a Microsoft Word and TeX
style sheets.
They can be copied via anonymous ftp 
  from   nada.kth.se
  as     /pub/ecscw95/papers-dummies/Dummy_Manus.bin (MS Word)
                                                .hqx (MS Word)
                                                .rtf (RTF)
         /pub/ecscw95/papers-dummies/TeX/  (TeX-files)

The RTF format or binhex can also be requested via email from the 
Conference Secretariat (email address: ecscw95@kth.se).

