#summary How to develop techreports using csdl-techreports.
#labels Featured

The csdl-techreports project at Google Project Hosting is designed to facilitate development of LaTeX techreports by members of the [http://csdl.ics.hawaii.edu/ Collaborative Software Development Laboratory] at the [http://www.ics.hawaii.edu Department of Information and Computer Sciences] at the [http://www.hawaii.edu University of Hawaii] and their affiliates. 

This page provides step-by-step instructions on how to get started using this library. 

== 1.0 Download and install Tex ==

If you have not done so already, you must download a distribution of TeX. We recommend [http://www.tug.org/texlive/ Tex Live].  

If you are using Windows, you should download TeX Live using the installer package made available on the [http://www.tug.org/texlive/acquire.html TeX Live availability page].  (See the section entitled, "TeX Live installation over the internet".)  This involves downloading a file named install-tl.zip, uncompressing it, then double-clicking the file named install-tl.bat to start the downloading process.

If you are using Macintosh, you should download the [http://www.tug.org/mactex/ MacTex] package for Tex Live. This involves downloading a file called MacTeX.mpkg.zip and double-clicking it to start the installation process. 

== 2.0 Set up a local csdl-techreports workspace ==

Next, create a local csdl-techreports workspace to hold your files.   One way to do this is as follows:

  # Make sure you are a member of the [http://code.google.com/p/csdl-techreports/ csdl-techreports] project. You need to be a member in order to commit changes. 

  # Checkout the entire trunk/ directory, then delete all subdirectories that are not of interest.  In general, you will want to retain the styles/, bib/, and 00-00/ subdirectories, as well as any directories containing techreports you are actively working on.  (Alternatively, you can check out the individual subdirectories of interest rather than checking out the entire trunk/, or you can alternatively check out the entire trunk/ and not delete the subdirectories.) 

== 3.0 Define environment variables ==


