\subsection{NarraNet: Integrating qualitative and quantitative information}

We propose to use concepts from narrative and network analysis, as outlined
in the related work section, to build a novel framework for integrating
qualitative and quantitative data.  This framework is tentatively named
NarraNet.

{\bf Narrative models and narrative fragments: years 1 and 2} Core concepts
will come from the formal analysis of narrative \cite(bal) \cite(Abell87)
and event structure analysis \cite(heise89) \cite(corsaro90).

Data from CEDAR will be modeled as “narrative fragments” ? a piece of
a story.  Narrative fragments provide a very generic but powerful structure
to make meaningful connections and facilitate interpretation.  Each datum
in CEDAR will be indexed using categories from narrative analysis, such as
Burke’s \cite(burke69) grammar of motives (actor, act, scene, agency,
purpose) or Fillmore’s \cite(Fillmore68) case grammar.

The choice of exactly which dimension to include, and the extent to which
customization is allowed, are important research questions.  For example,
we can add additional elements to the structure, such as “input” and
“output”, so that we could support generic process representations,
such as the Process Specification Language (PSL).  Spatial coordinates or
other properties (e.g., generic keywords) could also be added when
necessary, without loss of generality for the basic indexing mechanism.

Why use narrative fragments?  * Narrative fragments are like amino acids:
the basic building block for the analysis of organizations and routines
\cite(feldman03).  * They include a natural representation of context,
especially when collected together into an overall pattern.  Qualitative
analysis tools, such as N6, facilitate these kinds of contextual analyses.
* They can be used to construct social networks \cite(White90) and other
kinds of networks \cite(Carley97) \cite(pentland99a).  * They include a
natural mechanism for abstraction and aggregation.  By providing ways to
abstract categories of “who” or “what”, this scheme provides a
way to select relevant sections of data.  * As you abstract away the
details (e.g., when, or who), the fragments become abstract patterns ? core
elements for an organizational pattern language.  This is what Feldman and
Pentland \cite(feldman03) refer to as ostensive aspect of the routine --
the abstract pattern.  These patterns can be used for design, as
demonstrated by the MIT Process Handbook \cite(Malone99).  *

{\bf Refining the model with data } In addition to building on existing
literature, we plan to refine our model using existing data collected from
other projects.  For example, Pentland has data on customer service
processes in Citibank \cite(pentland03a) that is appropriate for this
purpose. Pentland will supervise this work.  One research associate will be
required to support this analysis.

{\bf Applicability of existing domain ontologies } Domain ontologies are
very similar, in form and function, to the category structures produced by
ethnographers \cite(spradley79).  For some of the main dimensions, such as
“who”, it may be possible to apply existing domain ontologies to
facilitate greater comparability across sets of data.  The ability to
select or aggregate data based on shared ontologies would be a valuable
capability because it would facilitate a better understanding of context,
as well as generalization and abstraction of findings.  As we refine the
basic narrative model, we plan to explore the applicability of these
ontologies to the data .  A second graduate student will be require to
support this work.


{\bf Extracting quantitative measures } The use of narrative fragments as
the underlying representation supports a wide range of different kinds of
analysis. In particular, it allows researchers to extract quantitative data
for particular actors, actions, time periods, and so on. Counting,
aggregating, and similar operations will provide a way to generate familiar
quantitative measures (e.g., how many times did event X occur in time
period Y?).  Technically, this functionality is straightforward and could
be accomplished with SQL or similar technology.  It poses a research issue
mainly to the extent that it interacts with policies concerning privacy.

{\bf Modeling organizational routines: Year 3 } As new data from CEDAR
becomes available, we will begin testing the framework for narrative
analysis against actual data.  Consistent with our earlier work, we
conceptualize this effort in terms of organizational routines
\cite(feldman03) \cite(pentland05) .  Organizational routines provide a
window on a huge variety of organizational phenomena: stability, change,
innovation, learning, adaptation, and so on. The key research problem here
is pattern recognition and pattern matching: How do narrative fragment fit
together to create repetitive, recognizable patterns of action
\cite(feldman03)?

In the current proposal, we plan to approach this problem by applying a
variety of techniques described in the related work section.  An additional
research associate will be required to support this work.  Feldman and
Pentland will supervise this effort.

Routines are often called the "genetic material" of organizations.  To the
extent that routines are like genes, CEDAR creates the possibility of an
"organizational genome" project -- collecting and comparing routines within
and between organizations.  As with genetic mapping, the proposed
technology can be expected to reveal insights and opportunities that we
cannot predict, but the potential impact is huge.  Because routines embody
the practical concerns of managers (e.g., process improvement), we
anticipate a receptive audience for the proposed technology.

{\bf Network analysis with new data: Year 4} Because “ties are
stories” \cite(White90), narrative fragments from CEDAR will support the
creation of a wide variety of network models. Network structure provides
ways of detecting patterns of relationships, such as centrality, structural
equivalence and structural holes \cite(wasserman94).  These network
regularities provide powerful, parsimonious explanations for a wide range
of organizational phenomena.  Feldman and Pentland will supervise this
effort, with the support of an additional graduate student.

Network dynamics adds a new and vitally important tool for understanding
organizational processes (stability, change, power, etc.)  Because
narrative fragments are based on time-stamped events, NarraNet should be
able to generate dynamic network “movies” automatically.  Excellent
network visualization tools are available, so we do not propose to develop
new ones.  For example, an application called SONIA will create quicktime
movies of networks (see
http://www.sociology.ohio-state.edu/jwm/NetMovies/).




@InBook{Fillmore68 ,
  author =	 { Charles J. Fillmore },
  editor =	 { Emmon Bach and Robert Harms },
  title =	 { Universals in Linguistic Theory },
  chapter =	 { The Case for Case },
  publisher ={ Holt Rinehart and Winston },
  year =	 {1968 },
}

@article{malone99, 
   Author = { T. W. Malone and K. G. Crowston and J. Lee and B. T. Pentland and C. Dellarocas and G. Wyner and J. Quimbyand C. S. Osborn and A. Bernstein and G. Herman and M. Klein and E. O'Donnell },
   Title = {Tools for Inventing Organizations: Towards a Handbook of Organizational Processes},
  journal =	 { Management Science, },
  year =	 {1999 },
  volume =	 {45},
  month =	 {March },
  number =	 {3 }
}





