
[1.1]  Try to eliminate all negativity about Hawaii from the 
proposal.  This project will be useful no matter if Hawaii
is experiencing boom times or depression. You want the 
proposal to radiate optimism.  You can reword the beginning,
for example, with something like the following:

"The government and people of Hawaii are focusing new effort
and emphasis on support for the incubation and growth of
small business.  The initial development of a small business
depends upon many factors, but one of the most important is
a high quality business plan: a roadmap that describes what
the business is, why it can be successful, and how it will
be organized and operate over time.  The best business plans
are living documents that evolve and change to reflect the
growth and maturation of the organization."

[1.2] "checklist" -> "checklists"

[1.2] "few ... ideas" -> "few repositories where
entrepenuers can learn from examples of a variety of
business plans."

[1.2] "will  .. funded" -> "has a low chance of getting 
their business funded."

[1.3] "In  .... principles." -> "I propose that many of 
these problems in the development of high quality business
plans can be solved by applying principles from software
engineering.""

[1.3] "principles are" -> "principles I propose to apply
are"

[1.3] "defect" -> "defects"

[1.3] Provide only one URL. They are linked.

[1.3] "The Leap Toolkit .... improve their plans" -> "The
Leap Toolkit is a general purpose mechanism for technical
skill acquisition and improvement. Currently, it is in use
to support software development and technical writing. With
this grant, I will adapt the Leap Toolkit to support the
development and improvement of business plans for new small
businesses in the State of Hawaii. Entrepeneurs will use
Leap to obtain useful reviews of their business plans, to
access and contributes helpful checklists that detect common
problems in Hawaii business plans, and to learn from and
generate new patterns that represent common features of and
approaches to successful Hawaii business plans."

[1.3.1] "tries to avoid these pit-falls" -> "successfully
avoids these pit-falls"

[1.3.1]  Need a screen dump 

[1.4] American express site. Put a sentence in to explain 
how this site fails to encompass all the qualities that
your business will provide (Hawaii-specific?  Automated
support for contributing checklists and patterns?)

[1.3.1]  I think you should end this section by saying
something about how Cam, after starting his business, 
is contacted by your company (or else voluntarily) 
contributes new checklists and patterns (and perhaps
edits old ones) to improve the site.  You want to 
get people to see that it's the *business community* that
will be adding new knowledge and keeping the site current.
This is another advantage/difference between your approach
and the competing technologies. 

[1.5] Second sentence should end with a "?"
Third sentence: "Second, there are privacy issues involved
with business plans that must be addressed in the system."

Second paragraph: "This grant will provide an opportunity to 
address the first risk, by providing the ability to develop
a small prototype version and evaluate its impact."

Third paragraph: (Stick in a sentence saying that the
problem of privacy also exists in software development and
we can apply technology we are developing there to this
domain.)

1.6.1 Make these into sentences, not bullets.

3.  Wording is quite choppy, but the ideas are fine.  Do
another pass to smooth it out. 
